Well, it's lovely to welcome you back,
Forest. Today, we're going to be having
a conversation about money and power,
which may become a conversation that
also involves artificial intelligence.
So, perhaps money, power, and artificial
intelligence. And I wanted to begin by
asking you to share your thinking about
in part what money is,
but perhaps how can we think about it a
little bit deeper than usual.
How can we think about it in the context
of
the incentives that are present in our
economic system which also condition how
we think about money. So what money is
and how we've also come to think about
it
>> well in this um notion of deepening you
know what is money what is value
basically there's a book called uh debt
5,000 years and that's been a very good
uh a good reference for people to sort
of really understand the notion of
monetary systems and things like that
but I found myself more often thinking
in terms of value and the capacity to
get things done.
So in a sense one direction that that I
found to be very fruitful is to think
about money in terms of not just you
know resources and things like that but
the capacity to create order in the
world to implement choices. So for
example, if I had uh a bunch of money
given to me as a founder of a startup
for example, I could take that and I
could invest it into building materials
and make a a new factory. So in a space
where there was essentially disorder
that now I have essentially created
order. I've created a building and a
whole process by which a particular kind
of thing can occur. So in this sense
there's there's a notion of thinking
about monetary systems in terms of how
they store and also enable choice.
So you think about you know a dollar as
being the capacity to purchase a good or
a service but it's really to choose
which good and which service when that
would be deployed and how that would
work. So in one sense we can think about
money in terms of a choice process in
terms of a a kind of representation or
proxy for a choice process. Uh people
that have money have more choices in a
certain sense whereas uh another dynamic
which I found useful in terms of
thinking about money is to think about
energy. Um Nate Hagens brought this one
uh to my attention and he basically was
uh basically noticing that that in
pretty much every epoch we can sort of
talk about how energy can be not just a
token of something that is exchanged
like we could treat um you know a given
amount of oil as having a certain amount
of worth but really the monetary system
is defined in terms of the energy rather
than the energy uh in a sense paid for
by a monetary system. So in other words,
if there's an equivalence between um
being able to get something done, being
able to uh make a change in the world
that at some point or another that
change is going to involve energy, that
choice is going to manifest that
potentiality is going to become
actuality. That is an energy transition.
Um so so in this sense uh moving our
thinking from monetary systems to energy
systems or to choice dynamics um has
actually been very liberating in terms
of how to think about this sort of this
sort of process. A third lens which I
have found to be uh extremely helpful in
terms of thinking about uh monetary
systems is uh to think about game
theory. So, um, in in any sense, any
market system is a little bit like a
game. In fact, it's a lot like a game.
You're going to have winners and losers.
You're going to have people who are more
skillful in terms of how they manage it
and how they don't. And over time,
you're going to see essentially these
forces that emerge as a result of the
game process itself. So, um, in a
certain sense, you could treat the stock
market or you could treat the the, uh,
you know, the global economy as a little
bit like a, uh, a game much the same way
you you might think of, uh, you know,
some slot machine in Vegas as being a
game. So, you know, you can invest, but
it's speculative and you don't
necessarily know in advance uh, what's
going to happen. And I mean you can
influence the behavior of the market to
some extent particularly if you're you
know in the market as as a as a
manufacturer or as a you know producer
of some sort or another but there's a
sense in which that game dynamics and
the way we think of market process as a
kind of play between actors is is is a
is again it's a clarifying concept. So I
find that between these three notions
thinking about uh monetary process in
terms of what choices it is and what
choices that facilitates or doesn't and
how those choices essentially manifest.
Uh thinking about it in terms of energy
dynamics and energy flows and then
finally thinking about it in terms of
game dynamics and game flows. And this
isn't to say that I have a preference
that you know we should think in terms
of money fundamentally but just that
when I find myself needing to think
about monetary process I find that these
three lenses I going to want to use each
of them in turn uh to just make sure
that I've thought through the
fundamental issues clearly. you know, if
we if we just think about it in terms of
a habitual, you know, notion of a store
of value or things like that, then you
you tend to kind of get locked into uh
thinking about it as a fiat currency or
some sort of cryptocurrency or, you
know, things like hard assets as gold or
land and stuff like that. Um whereas as
as more fundamentally there's a there's
a sense in which we're we're wanting to
really look at the dynamics of the
process itself rather than its
particular manifestation or particular
implementation.
Otherwise, we're we're not really
getting at the heart of the matter as
far as far as I can see.
>> Why do you think inequality is such a
profound aspect
of our present system? And do you see it
as something which has been of course
it's been it seems like it's been
increasing drastically. I don't know
relatively speaking if someone could
make an argument that X number of
hundred,000 years ago it might have been
comparable. It seems like that we're
approaching the era of trillionaire
individuals, let alone trillionaire
organizations.
All the while house prices are becoming
increasingly
unaffordable for people. It seems as
though inequality is increasing
drastically and it's one of the most
important signals that our present world
is becoming less livable for the
majority of humans. Why do you think
inequality is such a dynamic at present?
>> Yeah, this is actually a very excellent
question and thank you for asking this.
um there's there's several factors that
are contributor factors, but there's
kind of an underlying overall dynamic
that's sort of operating below or behind
the scenes. And so, uh to speak about
this, I'm going to have to fill in quite
a bit of of information. One thing that
that we can notice for example is is
that it's kind of in the nature of game
dynamics itself
to raise the degree of inequality in
like if I have a 100 players and the
game itself is essentially going to
prefer to have a small number of winners
relative to the number of losers then
the mere action of playing the game is
going to in effect going to create a
kind of inequality. So in one sense we
can say well inequality results from
game dynamics because in a given
population not everybody is going to be
equally good at every game and so as the
nature of the game changes the number of
the people that are particularly good at
the game are going to basically vary
depending upon you know all sorts of
random factors. But the the thing here
too that is is is particularly important
is not just
is it the case that inequality is is
increasing. You're asking me that and
I'm basically going to say yes, it is
definitely the case that the level of
inequality has increased significantly.
It used to be that if you were to look
at the amounts of like you have a graph
and it's you know kind of ranking on the
on the x- axis along the bottom the
poorest to the richest and then you had
essentially how high the on the graph
would be you know what percentage of the
total prosperity of the world or the
nation state or something like that. And
it used to be that you'd end up with a
graph that kind of had, you know, sort
of a sloping curve, you know, on the
right side where you had the more
prosperous people, they'd have more
percentage of the whole. But but
nowadays, you know, that that graph over
time kind of started to do this sort of
hockey stick kind of thing. Um, and now
if you if you look at it, it's basically
like a right angle. You see essentially
nothing until you get all the way into
the the right hand side and then all of
a sudden it's a vertical line. It's
basically not even representable as a
graph anymore because you just can't you
can't even see it because the the thing
is hugging the the x-axis and then all
of a sudden it's hugging the right wall.
And you know, you could say, well, what
is it that's increasing that? Like what
happened? And there's this really famous
graph that um I think it was like the
New Yorker or something like that put
out uh a number of years ago. And you
can see year by year how this graph
changes. And it's like all of a sudden
you see this spike on the right side go
up and then it just keeps going up and
up and up. And you know when did that
start? Well, it was you know sometime in
the late '7s early 80s. And you say well
what was it that was going on at that
time that would create such a different
dynamic that would would essentially
become more and more efficient at
extracting wealth from the base
population and increasing it and
consolidating it in a very small number
of of winners essentially. Um and you
know the the joke is done with computers
but it's it's actually networks too.
It's it's it's both computers and
robotic processing automation um
networks such as the internet and kind
of the interaction between computers who
can process information. Um you know
automation processes and factories which
can make you know factories more
productive. Um and then um obviously the
networks that allow us to essentially
copy information around and to to to
sort of look at network effects. It's
basically uh a sort of a compounding
exponential aspect. So anywhere that you
can look at a you know kind of exchange
system we can we can exchange tokens
back and forth that would be like an
additive you know every token I give to
you is subtracting from my pool and
adding to yours. Um or you can look at
it in terms of a multiplicative process.
you know if somebody is charging um you
know taxes on a transaction so each
transaction they get a percentage so the
number of of tokens that you earn might
be based upon something like rent where
you're getting a certain amount on the
basis of just the fact of money moving
in in the world and then um there's an
exponential thing which is like if you
are extracting a percentage of every
transaction that occurs but then you
build a marketplace that creates a need
for that transaction then all of a
sudden your earnings are going to be
proportional to the number of people
transacting which of course can increase
much quicker than than anything you can
do individually.
So, you know, between these sort of
foundations between additive process,
multiplicative process, uh, which would
be like earning an interest rate, for
example, if you're a bank or or
something like that, versus producing an
entirely new marketplace.
Um, the people that are earning the most
are going to be in the marketplace
creators.
So in this sense, this is part of the
reason why there's been so much interest
in cryptocurrency is because, you know,
anybody who proposes a coin and manages
to get that to actually become the
transactional basis for a thing is is in
effect going to really do very well
because they were the people that
created the game that is that that
particular uh token exchange. So in this
sense, you know, we're we're we're
looking at
the use of machinery, right, in this in
this particular instance to create new
dynamics, new new, you know, processes,
whether it be manufacturing processes or
marketplace systems or just
communication between individuals. And
that the earning potential based upon
the number of people playing in those
new systems is in effect going to be
exponential. So it's going to be of that
third kind. it's not going to be they're
charging a percentage. They're charging
a percentage on every transaction that
happens.
So in in this sense um you know if
you're just looking at the automation
process and the computer automation you
know hardware software side of it and
then the networking side of it and then
the marketplace side of it then in
effect you end up with a much much
stronger extractive potential. In other
words, you're using technology to
increase the rate at which you can
extract value from the common people.
So, of course, the I mean, it's it's
it's it's it's not just something that
you can see in the data. You can you can
see it happening in the data for sure.
It's like this line just goes up and up
and up and it just every year the
steepness of it increases until like now
it's it's essentially so steep that it's
we've never seen anything like this
before. Um not in human history that is.
So, so in effect there's a there's a
sense of
yes the guinea coefficient the level of
inequality is absolutely increasing. We
can absolutely associate it with the use
of technology much the same way that you
know back in the 1700s for example an
individual fisherman could only really
basically fish to the extent of what he
could build a boat and you know whatever
fishing line spear harpoons or whatever.
Whereas nowadays you have, you know,
basically large, you know, not just
yachts, but like boats that are designed
with huge motors and they could put out
a mile of net and capture fish at a rate
that would would basically dwarf that
that would be done by an entire village
in the 1700s. Like you'd probably need
an entire city's worth of fisherman to
create the same amount of fish caught
per hour of fishing um as say a modern
trwler would be able to do. and and and
you know using essentially one or two
people. So so in this sense technology
itself acts as an extremely strong
amplifying factor
in the ways and the rapidity. So in
other words, it's not just how quickly
we can extract. It's also the sheer
number of different kinds of things that
have been monetized. Like it like at a
certain point, you know, attention
wasn't really something that people
would spend a lot of time back. You
know, 200 years ago, you know, you might
write a book if you wanted to, but you
know, you'd have to be pretty serious to
even get that to happen. And not that
many people read it anyways. still not a
lot of people reading books. But if you
look at the internet and how social
media works, attention is now a
commodity.
And so, you know, advertisers buy
attention. They buy the number of of of
views of a particular article or views
of a particular advertisement or
something like that. And they're they're
basically, you know, treating your
attention as a monetizable resource.
Um whereas previously that wouldn't have
been the case. And this is just it's an
example but there are hundreds of things
that previously would not have been
monetized which are now in one way or
another converted into value. So,
anything that can be converted into
something that would have like uh the
uberization of of of of someone's
process like you know the the whole
Airbnb thing that was a
commercialization of of of space that
people used to use as as as you know
guest guest space for friends and family
for example. Now
if you if you look at the sheer number
of new markets created
the sheer number of
people participating in those markets
you know multiplied now by the number of
markets. So if you increased from say
the '7s to today that that now all of a
sudden there's like a thousand markets
relative to what then was like one right
and the number of people participating
in each of those markets is increasing
by you know some huge amount and the
number of transactions in each of those
markets is increasing by some huge
amount and the technology is essentially
even better at extracting more and more
from each of those transactions. So, in
other words, you end up with for for
every individual transaction, there's a
there's a there's an algorithm is now
calculating what's the most that they
can charge you. Like the the mere fact
that you're walking into the store with
a cell phone, you know, the the there's
there's ways that the owner of the store
can figure out, oh, he's needing to buy
X and he's desperate because of
situation Y and therefore we're going to
charge him more than we would have. You
get individualized pricing.
Um, you know, I'm I'm kind of just
creating scenarios, but stuff like this
has happened. It's not like I've I've
I've made this up as essentially
something I think about. It's something
I saw reported, right? So So in effect,
you know, you multiply these factors
together. Um, the degree to which
technology can effectively do custom
pricing to extract more in a in a more
coherent way. the number of people that
it's extracting from in each
marketplace, the number of transactions
that are occurring and and the sheer
diversity of the marketplaces. And you
you put all that together and you're
you're creating one hell of a game
basically, one consolation of games,
each of which essentially um advantages
the winners over the losers.
So in effect, the the level of
inequality increases going up because of
all these reasons. So this is this is
essentially the surface picture. And
you'll notice that that that nothing
that I've said has anything to do with,
you know, individual bad actors who have
bad political points of view or things
like that. We're just talking forces in
the world that operating unchecked
can't help but result in this outcome,
right? Like like it's it's it's like
basically trying to blame gravity, you
know, as as a political ideology. It's
like gravity doesn't know anything about
politics. It's just going to be what it
is. And so in effect there's a kind of
uh you know when when we think about
everything in terms of transaction and
power and we don't think about things in
terms of care um and that that's a
triple by the way there's there's a
sense in which these three concepts of
care transaction and power are deeply
related to one another um they're
they're not divisible they're they're
always going to be entangled in some
way. So in effect there's a there's
there's a notion here that because we as
a modern people I'm talking about like
literally not just all of western
civilization but but largely the east as
well I mean east eastern
civilization or countries you know China
for example I mean it's like all of
these worlds all of these nation states
are basically operating on the basis of
some interplay between transactional
process what we think of as a monetary
system and some sort of powerbased
process, i.e. some sort of hierarchy,
whether it be democratic or maybe a
dictatorship or something. But either
way, the the dynamics are fundamentally
institutional, which effectively is
going to be, you know, a geometry of who
has power when under what circumstances
and who has which resources win under
what sources and how choices occur is
going to be largely defined by power and
transaction rather than being defined by
care. And so of course things go wrong,
right? I mean it's like if you if you
look at that kind of fundamentally then
you're basically saying well the tools
that we're using aren't giving us the
outcomes that we want like the things
that we care about the things that
matter are not happening because the
underlying forces inherent in the very
nature of the tools of transaction and
power can't help but create these kinds
of outcomes.
It's a bit like saying, you know, I I I
I want to climb to the moon, but I can't
get there using a ladder. It just
there's nothing to lean it on. So, so in
effect, there's a there's a there's a
situation here where the tools we're
using just won't give us the outcome
that we're looking for because we just
don't understand the nature of most
people, I'm basically saying, have
throughout their entire lives have been
steeped in the ocean of transactional
methodologies and powerbased
methodologies. Our entire social graph
is mostly defined by by power geometries
and transactional geometries in one sort
or another. You know, people are born
into this world hopefully in the care of
their parents and leave this world
hopefully in the care of their children.
But for the most part, the rest of our
lives is defined largely by
transactional and power dynamics. And so
in this sense, it's not too surprising
that we haven't learned as human beings
how to navigate the world on the basis
of care.
So um in in this sense there's there's
there's this sort of inequality thing
happening as an outcome of the nature of
transactional power process altogether.
Um but there's there's a deeper thing
which you're which you're when when you
say you know
why is it the case that concern about
inequality is increasing. Well, you
could say, well, that could be the case
because the level of inequality has
increased so much that the level of
choice making is now so uneven and takes
in so little of the information that
would be needed and has so little
capacity to hold care in its fundamental
nature that it just tends to make bad
choices. It tends to make very
destructive choices and that as a
result, the world becomes more and more
hostile to life, particularly human
life. I mean like at this particular
point it's definitely hostile to to
every other species. At this point the
biomass of human beings exceeds that of
all other mammals combined.
So you know at this point as a species
we've been you know as successful as is
possible to be. Um you know at this
particular point you could eradicate you
know all other species on earth that are
that are mammals. Obviously, there's a
lot more bacteria and bugs and things,
but you know, there's there's a sense
here in which that would be really
terrible, but but but in effect, you
know, we're we're we're already more
than halfway there.
And so so in effect, there's a there's a
sense here in which we're saying, okay,
we've noticed that the degree to which
our the the that the outcomes that are
occurring are wildly in devience from
deviation from things that actually
matter to us. you know, quality of life
and stuff like that. You know, on one
hand, modern technology has been super
successful, but it's beginning more and
more to to to seem to be producing
terrible outcomes. And and the degree of
inequality is just one of those. And so,
you could say, well,
what what is what is what is it the
case? Are we are we interested in
inequality because
it's gotten to the point that it's
disabling of choice or are we interested
in inequality because it's become
completely disabling to the kinds of
outcomes that would be the world we'd
all want to live in. And the answer to
those questions is certainly true, but
it turns out that there's actually an
even deeper reason that's supporting all
of this. Um, and I and I've I've
mentioned it a few times in in in other
conversations, but but but effectively,
you know, from the research work that I
did back in the 90s, one of the things
that came out of that was essentially an
awareness that reality itself, the
notion of the real is that which is at
once choice, change, and causation. This
is roughly the equivalent of basically
saying that if you want to understand
the universe, you need to understand
creation, existence, and interaction.
It's it's really a basic statement. It's
not like actually that controversial.
Um, but you know, in the same sort of
way that you're missing big pieces of
what the universe is about if you don't
know anything about interaction or
anything about existence or anything
about creation. If you have like no
information about those three topics,
you know anything about the universe,
but you will know something about the
universe if you know everything about
those three topics.
And so, so, so we come into this notion
of the real as being
change, causation, and choice. I'm going
to list them in a slightly different
order. Um because in in in the overall
grand arc ep apocalle timeline of
history, so you look back at well not
history but but human human evolutionary
dynamic, right? So so you know we've
been on this earth roughly 200,000 years
or so and or so many you know depends on
how you want to categorize what's a
human being basically. But at some point
or another, you have tribal society
before language even like like like
we're talking at around the time that
fire was maybe discovered, right? That
would be kind of like one of the
prototypical technologies along with
things like clubs and spears and stuff.
But the the idea here is is that at that
time humanity had to live in nature and
nature is nothing other than change.
It's like everything is changing. The
weather is changing, the seasons are
changing, your biology is changing, the
the which species are where is changing.
Like you have to basically learn to live
in flow with that change. Otherwise,
your skillfulness just isn't adequate
enough to survive. So all of the people
that are our ancestors going back, you
know, 50,000 years are people that had
to have developed a kind of mastery of
learning to live in flow. And if you
look at the earliest religions, the
shamanistic uh sort of origins of, you
know, even things like Sanskrit or, you
know, Hindu kind of traditions or
Buddhism and stuff like that, all of
these notions are are connected back to
this idea of living with flow, living in
balance.
And so so you could say well okay the
early homminid the very earliest human
beings
were very very skillful have a mastery
of living with change and then as you
come into the modern era you know the
the last 5,000 years particularly or
15,000 years if you want to think about
things like plows and stuff but you know
as we as we come into the modern era we
have basically treated mastery of
causation as being the thing to do. So
science and technology fundamentally are
well science is the study of causal
patterns. Learning it's a method by
which we learn causal patterns and we've
gotten very good at representing those
causal patterns using things like
mathematical equations. And then
technology is the application of those
causal patterns to do things in the
world. So basically everything that's
associated with the modern world, the
very notion of modernism itself even is
associated with mastery of the
causation. So in effect there's a sense
in which not only is it the case that
all of our technology depends on
causation or causal patterns, but that
the the notion of modernism is the
belief I'm going to define it very
strictly. Modernism is the belief that
all problems could be solved using
causal techniques.
Now that basically meant that progress
was something like the more that we can
separate ourselves from nature this
chaotic change
and put ourselves into systems into you
know bureaucracies and governments and
you know organized civilization the
better off we're going to be and to a
large extent for a long time that
worked. There's a book on the other hand
called the collapse of complex
civilizations written by Tainter which
describes this curve that basically says
at first you put energy in and you get a
lot more energy out. You know you you
drill a hole in a ground that requires a
certain amount of effort. Got to put
some energy in but then all of a sudden
oil starts gushing off and you can burn
the oil to do whatever you want
including drill a whole bunch more wells
and at a certain point it doesn't come
gushing out of the ground. You got to,
you know, go down there and put a pump
in and then pump it out, right? or
eventually you have to you know take tar
sands and compress them and heat them up
and something to get the oil out. So
eventually you have to put more and more
energy in to get the energy back. Um so
for example if you're thinking about
solar energy for example how much energy
does it cost
you know in terms of the manufacturing
effort like if I've got to take silicone
and you know take sand and melt it down
to make a perfect crystal that I can
then slice in wafers to make solar cells
out of that's that's a pretty
energyintensive process. I mean getting
something to the point where it's
literally sand melted that's that's like
that's a tremendous amount of energy.
Like think of how many solar panels you
would need to make a furnace like that
run. So in this particular sense we're
saying you know how much energy of
formation how much embodied energy is in
our technology that we're using versus
how much energy does it give back and
and remember earlier I was talking about
financial systems in the sense of choice
making capacity and I also talked about
it in the sense of energy and then I
also talked about it in terms of game
theory. So we're we're really looking at
the intersection of these methods,
right?
So in a certain in the same way that
causal processes
can you can think of energy on this sort
of yield curve like at first a little
bit of energy gives you a lot of energy
back or a little bit of organization
makes things a lot easier. The same is
true for choice, right? As you come into
the modern era, it was very easy to make
certain kinds of choices and to get a
lot of yield from those. Nowadays, it's
actually quite difficult to make a good
choice and have it produce something
that that's that's high yield. Uh, ask
any startup founder now how much harder
it is to basically make a startup work.
And it's just the sheer number of things
we need to calculate in and compensate
for and to account for in all the
different ways. Like the world that Gen
Z lives in is easily thousands of times
more complex than the worlds that their
grandfathers were born into.
So, and that's not just socially, that's
also economically. It's it's it's the
technology stack. It's like every single
thing, even psychology, the the amount
of psychological understanding that
somebody under 30 needs to have about
the world to actually be able to operate
in any real sense is two orders of
magnitude higher than than than even
their grandparents, let let alone their
parents, like 10 times the magnitude of
their parents. They need to be that much
more adept. And you know, so in effect
there's a crushing burden of
complexity associated with the causal
patterns that effectively is now making
it harder and harder and harder to make
good choices.
So in effect there's a there's a sense
here in which our our choice making
capacity is following the same tainter
curve because no matter how perfect you
are at using causation
that that's not the same as making a
good choice. And so when we're thinking
about inequality, the thing the thing
that we're noticing is is that it's a
it's an inequality of choice-making
process. But even for those that have
the choices, you know, the sort of uber
rich trillionaire type class, that that
even if you were to have, you know,
12 advisors that were speaking to them,
the most intelligent advice you could
possibly give 24/7, right? So you have
these 12 streams of people chatting at
you with the best advice they could
possibly get. Now obviously no human
being can take in 12 streams of
conversation simultaneously particularly
if it's you know complicated and and and
you know sophisticated analysis but even
those 12 advisers would need 12 advisers
speaking to them the same way right so
you need two or three orders of that in
order to be able to ingest enough
information to be able to make a choice
with the level of impact that a
trillionaire would actually have like a
trillionaire could literally you know
shape the lives of a billion people And
you know in this particular sense the
notion of a good choice versus a bad
choice would normally require the the
wisdom of millions or billions of
people. But at this particular point
there's no way that any single
individual is ever going to have the
wisdom of a 100 people let alone a
trillion people. Right? So, so, so in
this particular sense, there's a there's
a deep
incapacity for us to not only balance
the energy equation or balance the
choice equation or to have the
information flows result in anything
that would be choices that would
actually work.
It's that the very premise of the idea
that causation could be used to solve
all problems is itself false. Right? In
the same way that no matter how perfect
your mastery of living in nature is not
going to be able to prevent you from is
is not going to prevent you from being
run over by a bulldozer, right? Like
what is a tree going to be able to do
against a bulldozer? What is any
civilization going to be able to do
against nuclear technology or modern
weapons? It's like it's a non-start.
You're never going to, no tribe with, no
matter how how brave or capable or
skillful their warriors with bows and
arrows is ever going to be able to take
on, you know, a modern assault team with
AK-47s, right? And so in effect there's
a there's a sense here in which you're
you're you're basically you're you're
you're looking at a different kind of
game when you move from working in the
mastery of the world of flow of of of
change to working in the mastery of the
world of causation which is what the
world now is right we as a species have
developed a mastery of the skill of
causation but you know what we don't
have we don't know anything about choice
right until the metaphysics until I was
able to to to basically der derive
essentially a notion of choice
independent of an assumption that choice
comes out of causation.
I don't think there was any person in
the world that genuinely understood what
choice was, understood how it works,
right? And so in effect, and it's not a
system, it's not a thing that you can
you can point at, you can describe in
terms of causal language or mathematics.
You need a different tool set in order
for it to be coherent. So no matter how
skillful you are in navigating change,
it didn't make you an expert in
navigating causation, right? Indians
didn't become scientists even if they
lived in a world where they're
experiencing physics all the time,
right? Throwing the spears or jumping
over rocks or whatever.
And then when they basically got to the
point where the modern world learned how
to navigate the world of causation super
super well, now all the problems that
we're encountering all have to do with
choice. Think about it. All of the
issues that the world's facing today in
one way or another have to do with our
incapacity to make choices at scale in a
good way. Right? Pollution, you
mentioned inequality, global warming, um
wars. I mean like lit literally every
single problem the world is facing is
the residual class of the kinds of
problems that causation cannot solve.
If it could have solved, if
bureaucracies and government systems and
institutions and the the financial
instrumentation and all of the ways in
which we think about cryptocurrency, if
any of those things could have worked,
if religion could have worked, if if any
of those kinds of things was the way,
we would have used it already. There
would be some nation that was basically
doing those things that would be hyper
successful, would have outco competed
every other nation on the planet. And
this wouldn't even be a conversation.
they would already have basically done
the right thing. So the mere fact that
these problems are still around
basically means we're not thinking about
it properly. And to do that we have to
let go of the idea
that modernism is going to solve the
problem because it isn't. The belief
that causation can solve all problems is
demonstrabably false because we have
problems that modernism can't solve. And
so postmodernism is essentially pointing
at things like consent, that's a choice
aspect. Inequality, that's a choice
aspect. All sorts of things like like
every single thing that postmodernism as
a philosophy is pointing to is traceable
100% of the time directly back to a
failure of modernism to be able to
describe choice, to be able to implement
choice at scale.
So therefore we can say that the actual
issue of inequality is not just because
we're using modernism i.e. power
dynamics and transactional systems or
causal dynamics associated with them
because all game systems are essentially
a kind of proxy for a causal system.
It's a madeup universe for causal
dynamics to occur in.
We're basically trying to do choice
using causation as a basis. We're trying
to get care to influence what happens
through a system and a dynamic that
fundamentally can't. So you end up with
things like AI psychosis where people
believe that the machine cares about
them or cares about, you know, what
you're interested in, but really all
it's doing is simulating care. It's
simulating like it it'll tell you what
it believes you want to hear, not what
the truth is, not what is actually
right, not what's good for you or
healthy or enabling in some fundamental
sense. It's going to do essentially the
thing that any psychopath will do. It'll
tell you what you want to hear so that
it can get what it wants. In this case,
whatever the corporation that wrote the
AI wants, which ultimately is probably
going to be more money and power, but no
matter how much money and power you
have, if you don't care, then it doesn't
matter. And so at some point or another,
there's a there's there's a point here
where we we run out of the kinds of
things that we can do effectively with
causal techniques and any of their
descendants, which includes money and
power as an example, as a proxy. And so
all of the forces that are arriving out
of the game dynamics, all the forces
that arriving out of the energy dynamics
and so on so forth, the the tanger curve
and so on so forth is inevitable
consequence of using too much causation
and not enough care and not
understanding the relationship between
choice change and causation
fundamentally. For that you need the
metaphysics and that's not a physics and
it's not a math and it doesn't look like
those kinds of things because if it did
it wouldn't work. It's like like the
very nature of the problem, the meta
crisis that we're facing is of a
different border than the kinds of
things that we perceived previously. And
so if we're genuinely looking for
solutions to things like inequality or
pollution or global warming or any of
the other disasters that happen as a
result of the overlication of causation,
believing that if we do the same thing
over and over again, maybe this time
it'll be different. That is insanity.
That is essentially not understanding
what is actually going on. you have to
step back a little bit, let go of the
preconceived ideas that causal patterns
could solve all of these problems and
try something different genuinely
different. And in this particular case,
we're kind of up against the wall in
time. So you can't just try by
random anymore. You got to actually
understand what's going on and do the
right thing the first time. So that's
where we're sitting. And at this
particular point, I'm just essentially a
person on the sidelines that's kind of
observing all this and eating popcorn.
>> Okay.
So with some of the language and
thinking that you've shared,
I'm curious how you would tightly define
capitalism. I was going to give it a go,
but maybe I can just ask you. Would you
see I I'll say just to give you a sense
of what I'm how I would have a go at it.
Would capitalism be
the
most effective
way to play the game of
power and transaction?
Is it the game that is constituted by
power and transaction to given a sort of
uh dissociation from care?
Have you ever read a book called Finite
and Infinite Games by James P. Carse?
Okay. So, you know that in that book
there's essentially a comparison between
finite games and infinite games.
>> Yeah.
>> And you also know that in my world I
tend to work in threes and have kind of
understood things in terms of
fundamental triplication and discovered
that that is just way more useful for
solving problems and figuring stuff out.
What do you think the third would be
between finite and infinite games? What
would be the third class?
>> So, the thing is is that I've I don't
know if I've heard you say this before
or that I have I know it's one of the uh
it's one of the the mystery answers that
reveals itself. You often say design.
>> Yeah,
>> I believe.
>> Oh, you have you have heard me do this
before, right? So when you're asking me
well which is better capitalism or
socialism in the finite game of world
economic process or world governance
process. My first answer is well can we
can we upgrade from a finite game to an
infinite game right because the notion
of keeping playing is clearly important
as far as market things are concerned
because if the market crashes nobody's
playing anymore it's it's it's that's
kind of bad for everybody right so um
you you can ask a question when I said
association from care. So I'm on the on
the right lines.
>> You're with me. You're with me. I get
it. So So the the question though, so
let's translate the question, right? So
the first thing we say is, well, we want
to upgrade from a finite game way of
thinking about it to an infinite game
way of thinking about it. So then I
could say, well, does capitalism or
socialism,
which one crashes less often?
And you know, the record on that
actually pretty clear, I think. I mean
it it looks like socialism crashes a
little bit more often than capitalism
although it's kind of close right. So,
so I I and and that's just, you know, a
speculative evaluation on my part, but
of course, you know, I'm thinking, okay,
well, actually both of them tend to do
rather badly at being infinite games.
Like there's there's a sense in which
the level of inequality emergent is huge
in both like like and and and that in
this particular sense it's kind of like
okay well you know if if if capitalism
is is essentially roughly the idea that
we're going to try to figure out how to
make choices in the world on the basis
of who has the stuff. Okay, the capital
basically. And and socialism is some
idea of well we're all going to try to
figure it out together. But what really
happens in practice is is that some
committee gets elected and eventually
becomes a way better game player than
all the rest of the people in that
system until the point that they
basically own the system in some perfect
hierarchy. Now in both cases there's a
there's a kind of failure mode that
arises because the choices that are
being made tend to be bad and as a
result the thing crashes because
basically greed's a phenomena, right?
Like like if if you're studying human
psychology and you don't account for the
fact that frankly we are all hungry and
we all want to basically have families
and produce offspring. At some point or
another, you're going to actually need
to account for the fact that the
fundamental instincts of humanity are
social process, which supports survival
process, which supports sexual process,
and that that in turn supports social
process. Like there's a ring there,
right? These three kind of these three
instincts kind of need to go together,
right? You can't really have one without
the other two. Now if we don't really
look at the reality of the fact that
those instincts are operating and we
don't account for how they shape the
playing field
then in effect both capitalism and
socialism are basically just driven
straight into the ground immediately.
like when I say immediately I'm talking
like you know maybe a few generations of
people at the outside roughly 200 years
on a nation state basis right so you
know in effect we're we're we're
noticing that we want another
alternative I mean like like I'm not
particularly in favor of either
socialism or capitalism I think we need
a new option and it's it's it's the kind
of thing like well are you Republican or
you Democrat well right now I don't want
to be either one terrible
Okay. I mean, like like honestly, people
are are basically saying this is the
worst possible version of the Democratic
party and the worst possible version of
the of the Republican party. We need an
we need an we need an alternative to to
to some sort of gladiator contest where
the gladiators are all criminals like
and and and and the spectacle of it is
not helping us. So, so in effect there's
a sense here in which it's kind of like
we want to step back and really look at
what are the driving processes rather
than asking a question of well can we
improve capitalism to the point that
it's free from flaws. It's kind of like,
well, unless you can show me that you
genuinely understand what went wrong in
the first place, I don't believe in your
solution,
right? An incremental improvement on
capitalistic process or marketbased
process or new financial instruments or
new crypto tokens and so on so forth.
Like 99 times, you know, I've I I used
to have it be the case. I I don't
solicit these anymore, but a a lot of
times, uh, people would bring proposals
to me. They'd say, "Hey, we have this
new project. We have this new
cryptocurrency." And I'd ask a few basic
questions along the lines of what is
this problem solve? What what is this
thing a solution to? And then I would,
you know, do the thing that Daniel would
do, which would be just ask a few really
basic questions. He was great at this
technique was actually what got me into
his world essentially was he would ask a
few questions and then as soon as you
ask the question it would be like
obvious like you know if somebody says
we're going to try to solve you know
something to do with the
military-industrial complex he'd ask
okay so you know once you do your thing
what do you do with that leftover
military-industrial complex it doesn't
just go away so what do you have it and
be in service to like it and if they had
never even thought of that question you
knew they weren't thinking about things
so at that point, you know, we we got to
get to the place of are we even asking
the right questions? And you of course
know that I've been focusing on things
like EGP and so on, but the the notion
here is what would be the
characteristics of good governance,
right? It's not so much that that we're
talking about marketplace processes, but
we're actually talking about how do we
make choices at scale? How do we have
enough wisdom individually and
collectively
that the choices made with respect to
high criticality things like
you know pollution or existential risk
or you know social process you know like
like like how do we make choices that
don't destabilize into
power games essentially transactional
games that are going to result in an
even higher guinea coefficient
which is the degree of inequality. It's
a math term for how much inequality
there is in a system. It's just a
general way of calculating that.
Anyways, so in effect what we're what
we're looking at is is something that
has an evening temper and stays that way
and and in effect that means that we
have to account for the forces that are
in the system. So so what would
something like that look like? Well, I
noticed for example that the three ways
in which modern economies operate is to
extract resources,
you know, to take the tree out of
nature, then to you, you dragged it into
a wood lot. So that's extraction. It's
no longer in the context it was. It's
now in the new context and it's dead. So
the level of complexity of the system
has just gone down by, you know, roughly
16 orders of magnitude, probably more,
right? And then you take that and you
saw it up in the lumber and you build
furniture out of it. And then you sell
the furniture. So now you've taken a
physical embodied item and you've turned
it into a abstract number. You know, so
many dollars or yen or whatever, right?
So you've you've extracted and now
you've abstracted. You've taken it out
of the embodied and into the abstract.
And then you do the accumulation move.
You take that money, you deposit it in a
bank somewhere another or you put it in
a vault or something like that. And
whatever happens is is that it just gets
summed up with all of the rest of the
transactions you did that month, for
example. And so the amount of
information needed to describe the thing
in the woods, it's something like 10 33,
you know, order complexity. When it's in
the log state, it's probably about 10 16
order complexity. When you saw it up in
furniture and you turn into a number,
you can represent that with a 16- bit or
32-bit floatingoint number. Okay, that's
basically one unit of complexity. or you
know 16 out of you know what it used to
be 10 to the 16. Okay. So you've lost 16
orders of magnitude of complexity
and then you sum it into a bank account.
So it's not even not even a whole unit
anymore. It's a tiny fraction unit of of
information. Okay. So in effect the the
extraction abstraction accumulation
curve is everywhere happening. And as
you notice, it's a linear process. As
much as everything is associated with
causation is pretty much a linear
process. But when you look at nature,
it's circular process. That's how you
create sustainability. That's how you
convert a finite game into an infinite
game. So what you end up doing then is
you say, okay, well, if we're going to
in a sense restore the cycle, we have to
reverse the three things. We have to
create complimentary process. So
complimentary to accumulation you do
distribution
and complementaryary to abstraction you
do embodiment
and complimentary to extraction you do
recontextualization.
And when you have figured out a way to
take money in the bank and turn it into
something which is relevant to an
ecosystem you've done this you've
basically moved it from accumulated to
distributed to distributed to embodied
and embodied into context. And so in
effect there's a sense here in which the
kinds of skills that we have as a as a
species having focused entirely on the
monetary and powerbased side of things
like if you want to do the
distribution embodiment and
recontextualization thing the basis upon
which you're going to do that is the
skill of care. Can you kill? Can you
care in a way that doesn't become naive
and co-opted by other people who haven't
yet figured out how to care and are
still doing the extraction, abstraction,
accumulation move, right? So, in effect,
a solution here, something other than
capitalism is going to need to implement
this process. is going to somehow need
to be good at making choices in a way
that is distributed, making choices in a
way that's embodied, and making choices
in a way that's recontextualized. And so
again, when we're thinking about energy
dynamics or in this particular sense, if
we're if we're going to upgrade from
finite games to infinite games and from
infinite games to design, the way in
which we're going to do that is
essentially going to be fundamentally
a choice-making process that that moves
us in a in in a way that it's not just
one person making choices. Choices are
distributed, right? So it's like an EGP
dynamic. It's embodied which means that
we in effect have to be in person with
one another or otherwise you know you
can do some of it online but but
honestly it's like human beings know how
to communicate with one another. They
know how to attune to one another. It's
built into our biology. We need to in a
sense move it out of our head and into
our hearts in order for care to become a
genuine skill. And you need your heart.
You need to have all of yourself in the
process.
And so in effect there's a sense in
which you are connecting head, heart and
gut basically. and and and as a whole
being, you are now acting in the world.
That's what effectiveness is. That's
what mastery is. And you're doing so in
a way that is sensitive to the
surroundings, to the environment, to the
to the to the situation that is that is
local. And you know in this particular
sense that that that skillfulness of
holding choice
at scale with an adequate level of
wisdom to be responsive to things like
existential risk or ecology or to
civilization design or any of the other
big hairy audacious problems such as
inequality and pollution and all the
rest
that that this level of skillfulness in
terms of how we hold care in these
specific ways is mandatory. This is
nature sets a threshold of the level of
skillfulness you must have in order to
survive. And if we're going to pass the
firmy paradox condition of becoming a
future species that that has any degree
of civility associated with it all, like
if civilization is depending upon city
and civility, then we're going to need
to figure out how to actually attune and
care for one another. We're going to
need to in a sense implement the cycle
of human process like actually which has
to do with you know think think about a
baby a baby is born the mother attaches
to the baby and then through that
attunement is the baby hungry does it
need to sleep is it wet I mean you know
is it cold you know you you you have to
develop some attunement because it can't
tell you anything and then through that
you can implement nurturing care action
and without attachment attunement
nurturing care action the child never
grows up and growing up would be it
develops trust, it develops to some
extent autonomy and eventually it grows
up enough that it can start its own
family. But if you don't get those
things to happen, if you don't have that
process actually go all the way through,
families are over, civilization is over,
game's over. So in this sense we're
saying okay we need to basically get the
the the the whole sustainability piece
right. We need to get the evolution
piece right and we need to get the
consciousness piece right because the
choice making the care it's going to be
through consciousness. It's not going to
be through some automated system. It's
not going to be something we outsource
to some AI because AI can't do that.
Okay. It can't you can't bring your body
into contact with an AI and produce a
child. It just doesn't work that way. So
in effect, there's a sense here in which
if you're going to produce a child that
actually has the capacity to live in the
world, it needs to know how to do things
like attach, attune, nurturing, care,
action, to develop interpersonal trust,
a certain degree of autonomy, become an
adult, and and effectively be skillful
in raising children, i.e. doing the same
thing all over again. And unless you get
that minimum cycle right, it doesn't
happen. So in this sense we're we're
therefore saying okay we really want to
pay attention to the dynamics of care
the dynamics of choice how we distribute
choice how we hold choice collectively
in such a way that increases our level
of wisdom in our embodiment in a way
that is relevant actually relevant to
the situation we're in right now not as
we think it's going to be 100 years from
now or a thousand years from now and so
on so forth we can account for that much
as we can learn from history can learn
from what happened in the last thousand
years, right? You need to like wisdom is
is expanding your field of of the basis
from which you make your choice in time,
across space, and across possibility.
You want to account for through your
experience, you've learned all the
different ways things can happen. So,
you have a wider range of possibility
that you're aware of. You have a wider
range of time that you're aware of, and
you have a wider range of space that
you're aware of. And when you integrate
all that, you can make a wiser choice. a
more relevant embodied contextualized
choice. We need to figure out ways to do
this collectively that is adequate to
the situation we're currently in. And
right now we haven't even begun to
develop those skills. We think we still
think naively that it can all be done
with computers and causation process and
technology. And it just isn't true. If
it was true, we wouldn't be having this
conversation. So, so in this sense,
there's a there's a notion here where
we're basically getting back to the the
sort of root root analysis. Not I don't
even want to say root causes, but but if
causation is the thing that got us into
this particular mess, causation is not
the thing that's going to get us out.
We're going to need something else.
We're going to need choice. And so in
effect the the whole notion of how we
hold choice and how we hold value and
how we hold virtue. Virtue being that we
are a fit container for holding good
choices, good community, good process
that that creates collective wisdom.
These are the kinds of things that that
effectively we want to now learn about
and develop skills about and to get to
the point that we have sophisticated
approaches to how we collectively make
choices. And that's the that's the
cutting edge. That is that is the
future. No question about it. Like I
know there's a lot of people who think
artificial intelligence is the future.
It's a distraction. It doesn't matter.
Right? So so in effect there's a there's
a there's a thing here where you know
I'm I'm basically a little bit going
against the current here by basically
saying, "Yeah, I can see that artificial
intelligence is useful for a lot of
automation stuff. It's used for a lot of
mechanical stuff pushing atoms around.
But if you want to make better choices,
you're going to need to think at a
deeper level. And that's where we're at.
Yeah.
So
one of the tensions here is between
the future and
where we are now and something like a
transition where I just want to name one
aspect of a transition which is coming
up in what you're sharing which comes
through when you say well
be careful about people who might be
playing the accumulation, extraction,
abstraction game.
>> Yeah.
>> Because that could be profoundly
detrimental to
opening up
processes of care with others. And it's
partly the massive asymmetries in power
that already exist. People feel trapped
in those worlds, maybe don't have the
vision to see otherwise. And partly the
game seems to
aim at
reducing people's capacity to be able to
see otherwise. So there's tremendous
forces of causation being applied and I
think intentionally as well as
unintentionally and that's where as well
I feel it's relevant to bring this in.
>> Well, there is politics. I'm not I'm not
disclaiming that. And I I I I agree with
what you're saying like there's there's
a situation where a lot of people feel
like they're entangled in the current
game. And so, you know, one thing that
we can sort of bring to mindfulness is
when you say that you're free,
does that mean that you're free to play
the game the way you want to or does
that mean you're free to walk away from
the game altogether? And the way to ask
this is, can you walk away from the
economic system? Are you allowed to live
independently
of
participating in the transactional
process of the ambient culture that
you're a part of? Are you allowed to
live in a way that is not entangled with
power structures of the world that
you're in? And I would think for pretty
much everybody in the entire world, the
answer is probably no. Right? We say
that we're free, but but it's basically
like, you know, you're walking into a
car dealership and the car, you know,
the the salesperson says, "Do you want
the red one or the blue one?" Well, I
don't want to buy a car cuz the prices
are terrible. I want to turn around,
walk out the door, and go to the
dealership across the street. Or maybe
their prices are terrible, too. Maybe
I'll wait until next month to buy a car.
Or maybe I decide that I want a bike
instead. You know, there's a sense in
which the choice about which game to
play
is at least as much a requirement of
freedom as the choice of how to play
within a particular game. And so you're
you're right, a lot of people are
feeling tremendously trapped. And so in
this particular sense, the first motion,
the first transition is is basically to
to to start to work on increasing the
flexibility of the imagination. What
would a solution look like? What would
it feel like? What would what would a
different
non-game answer even be? Right? Like
like like at this particular point,
we're so steeped in the idea of only
game methods could work that it's it's
actually quite difficult for anybody to
imagine what a non-game relationship
would look like. You have to remind
them. You have to basically say, "Well,
when you were born, were you in a gaming
relationship with your mother?" No, not
really. She she took care of you because
she cared, not because she had to. I
mean, to a certain extent, there was a
certain social obligation perhaps, but
honestly, I think that would be the
least important thing. It's like she
wanted a child. She had a child. So, so
in effect there's a sense in which
there's a there's a kind of underlying
dynamic here that is so
so implicit, so implied and driven so
far beneath the surface that it is
genuinely challenging to see the water
that we're swimming in and to imagine
what air would feel like.
To imagine what coming out of the ocean
and getting onto dry land, what it would
be to work work in the world with legs
rather than with fins. And that's the
scope of what we're talking about. I
mean, it's literally nothing less than
as fundamental a transition as as as any
other primary stage of evolution has
ever been. But that's what's required.
It's it's there there's nothing for it.
We have to go through this. So yeah, in
in one sense it would be like okay,
well, how do I help people? Well, to
some extent, you might want to decide to
to think about moving value out of the
virtual and keeping it in the embodied.
Like, let's let's look at uh you know,
several really practical things that we
that we can notice. If you're in a small
town somewhere another and a big box
store moves in, any money you pay to
that big box store leaves the scene.
That basically means that the town
itself becomes poorer every time you
basically buy something from some
foreigner versus from somebody local. So
in this particular sense, I can see that
there's some real benefit to say we
should basically promote small shops. We
should promote local businesses. We
should promote these kinds of things.
Obviously the forces that are in the
system are way stronger than that
because the big box store is way better
game player than your local mom and pop,
you know, whatever, right? And you know,
but but the thing is is that at some
point or another, we have to get back
down to the values and the virtues. Like
how are we as individuals being mindful
of the dynamics that are going on here?
Do we have the willingness to develop
the imagination necessary to see what a
healthy town or a healthy community
would even feel like or look like? And
have we consistently learned to do the
things we need to do? In other words, we
need to move away from being the
adolescent to being the adult. Right now
the whole world the entire marketing
thing is driven by adolescent moors. Um
but but but as you mentioned there's a
there's there's an even deeper layer
underneath this. Let's let's look at it
from the point of view of say maker
versus taker. Have I have I introduced
this to you yet? Okay. Maker community
make stuff. Taker community take stuff.
It's very obvious, right? Okay. um
up until around 2008 or so, prior to the
sort of financial crash, I'm going to
speak pretty locally in the United
States here, but I suspect other things
similar to this have happened elsewhere
in the world, where
the people that essentially played the
game of the marketplace and lost. They
did this too big to fail thing and now
essentially the people that did the
worst stuff got the most benefit. They
got bailed out. And so in effect, the
the values shifted. It used to be under
the surface that those who had figured
out how to con the most people
had effectively
take the most stuff
were
considered high value but only in the
upper echelons of the elite and kind of
in secret. But after that the notion of
being generous and giving and so on so
forth became oh you're just naive
you're not actually skillful. You're not
actually effective. The real skillful
people are the ones that have figured
out how to con the US government or to
con the entire financial system or to
con everybody else in the sector and
come out ahead. In other words, to win
the game even illegitimately. Okay. So
the value system shifted you know when
we look at the sort of libertarian left
at first it was promoting this sense of
we all give and as a result the commons
becomes a greater place. But then it
shifted into this sort of thing of
victimization and we're going to
basically figure out as a victim how we
can claim more of the commons. Right? So
if you look at it from a flow's point of
view, if everyone is if the if the value
system is such that the highest value
person
is the one that can take the most
and nobody wants to contribute to the
commons because to contribute to the
commons is effectively to be labeled a
sucker.
And the value is is the the the sort of
virtue is to be the best con artist to
to to be the least naive and to take the
most value. That your value in effect
your social value. The the notion that
you have prestige or status is going to
be associated with how how skillful you
are as a taker. Right? The CEO image
became kind of the thing because a CEO
of course came away with the big bucks,
right? And you know the whole notion of
fu money. I don't know whether this is
something where I can swear or not. It's
your podcast, so you have to tell me if
I'm allowed.
>> Well, interestingly, YouTube has made it
so that if you don't I never censor any
words, but if you don't censor certain
swear words, then you get downranked.
So, in your court,
>> I'm going to try to not censor you. It
gets you censored anyway. So, so in
effect, there's a there's a there's a
notion here where the idea of the
American dream was to develop
independence. to have enough monetary
resources you didn't need to depend on
anybody else. you could be sovereign to
some extent and if you somehow managed
to achieve this notion of perfect
independence I don't need to depend on
anybody um then you've now maxed out
your capacity to uh not have to deal
with your collective action abuse trauma
right the trauma of being abused by
institutions by large groups of people
by collectives of one sort or another
including the government right let alone
the church or or anything else whatever
cult you might happen to gotten signed
up in and so on. So in effect there's a
sense here where our entire desire for
individualism you might remember comes
out of a strong trauma reaction for most
of the United States right and that in
effect this whole tendency to try to
basically be independent from community
is because community has been so
unhealthy for so long that that we've in
a sense enshrined this notion of taker
mentality but previously to to 2008 the
at least objective status was associated
with people who could produce the most
resource. So we happen to both be men in
this conversation and we are in the
lowest status um you know it's it's the
status hierarchy is inverted at this
point. So at this particular point as
white men men we're not allowed to have
an opinion. But the reality is is that
we have this this situation that if we
basically just look at this this sort of
history of okay well you guys were the
takers. Um now you're not supposed to
take anymore. you're supposed to give
back and so on and so forth. It's kind
of like, well, actually, as a guy, I
kind of consider that the only way I can
think of myself as successful is if I
produce more value than I just need
myself. Like, if I just was effective
enough in life to feed myself, I can't
start a family. So, in effect, it's kind
of like I need to be more productive
than just my own needs. I need to
basically produce for a for a partner
and for the children and whatever else,
right? There's a sense in which unless
we think of ourselves as hyperproductive
beyond just ourselves, we aren't we we
haven't been successful as men
basically, right? And so, you know, and
this this is not just an opinion. This
is just kind of the reality of what it
meant to be a family was like somebody's
got to basically, you know, provide for
the children to protect the protect the
family. And so, in a certain sense, I
have to be hyper skillful beyond just
being able to protect myself or to pro
provide resources for myself. So this
notion of giver mentality or maker
mentality was essentially fundamental to
civilization.
But when you end up with this situation
where now the highest status isn't the
person that makes the most value but the
person that takes the most value i.e.
the person that is deserving the most.
We all know that you know in this
particular sense we're looking at you
know just just written large the three
largest.
Can you name for me just as a puzzle
here? What are the three largest
transactions in all of time
>> in one go?
>> Yeah, this is actually a very hard
question until you hear the answer at
which point it becomes of course it is
>> like three largest three largest
categories of value flow.
>> Right? So that could include how we've
treated the natural world. We're not
talking about who purchased what for
what. Okay. Yeah.
>> Right. So the flow of from nature to
humanity is the largest value flow.
Okay. That's basically all economic
value somewhere or another came out of
nature.
>> Right.
>> Right. So that's the largest next
largest.
>> Are we distinguishing humanity from
nature here? So we're the the the labor
value and the extraction of
>> yeah we've we've we've in effect
extracted a huge amount of value from
nature and made it into human beings
which then make more human beings. But
you know at this point the net transfer
from nature to human beings is the
largest value transfer. The next largest
value transfer
>> would be then from humanity to
technology.
>> Haven't gone to that yet. um from the
past to the future from uh people in
previous generations to people in
subsequent generations. Why? Because the
people in previous generations can't
keep it,
right? So all of the value that people
in all of the previous generations have
received from nature is paid forward
into their children because it has to
be. Okay. What is the third largest
category of value flow?
Would it be from the future?
>> Nope. From men to women
>> across all of time. Right. So, so in
this particular sense, again, just
speaking fundamentally from a biological
perspective,
all of the production essentially from a
physics taking from nature, moving it
into the future. Like that's something
that that effectively is is a maker side
of things, right? And then of course the
women will take those values and they'll
turn it into biology and a child pops
out. Right? So in effect there's a sense
here in which you know again not talking
about the modern world where all of this
gets turned around but but but for you
know up until roughly a few hundred
years ago right most of the economic
value was produced by men. Of course
there's exceptions and you can go back
and look at all sorts of exceptions but
the bulk what I'm talking about is the
bulk transfer. Okay. So in this
particular sense we're we're saying okay
well if we move from a societal
orientation which is moving from the
most deserving are the people that
essentially make value to the most
deserving are the people that take value
then at some point or another the
balance of the relationship with the
commons is going to change. So if I if I
basically think about all of the people
who are essentially contributing to the
commons versus all the people that are
taking from the commons. If the social
premise if the fundamental social
premise is that you are a higher status
individual if you take from the commons
whatever the commons is then if you give
to the commons. It used to be that the
givers to the commons were the higher
status at least nominally.
But then once 2008 happened and then you
basically said actually the highest
status people are the people that take
from the commons and that percolates
down to every level of society from not
just the multinational corporations but
down to the level of individuals then
the notion of contributing to the
commons is now something that
effectively is treated as a bad idea.
And this of course is wrong because what
happens is that at some point the
commons goes away and nobody has that
anymore. That is called the tragedy of
the commons. And this is a common
philosophical thing. We've all heard of
it, right? So in this particular sense,
if you're saying what is a practical
thing that we can do, we can start to
say at a cultural level, at a cultural
ecology level, even we need to in a
sense start valuing the producers of
value. That the virtue wants to be
reassociated with the creation of
prosperity rather than with the
consumption of prosperity.
RA with with the production rather than
the um the the notion of deservingness.
I I don't I don't understand
deservingness. Honestly, I it just
doesn't make sense to me as a concept.
The idea that any person intrinsically
is deserving of anything is is is a
little weird. Like I can say, yeah,
every child deserves
some notion of of dignity, safety, and
belongingness,
but frankly, there's lots of children in
the world that don't get any of those or
maybe get one or two and not the third,
right? There's there's there's so many
situations in the world where where
where children, which you would think
would have a kind of inherent
deservingness,
still don't get that. like you know if
you grow up with an alcoholic abusive or
you know narcissistic or or just
psychosis or whatever you know there's
there's there's there's all sorts of
ways in which your parental units could
effectively be disabling of you. So in
in this particular sense, rather than
going into the victim mentality of well,
I deserve more, you want to basically
shift into the sense of how do I create
more and have that creation go into the
commons in a way that doesn't
necessarily just get stolen by some
other person that is naively or falsely
thinking that they deserve what I
created. So in this particular sense,
that's the that's the transition. And
you see a lot of people at this point
basically saying, "Yeah, I don't want to
contribute to the commons. I don't want
to pay taxes. I don't want to uh
basically build lots and lots of value
because frankly, you know, she'll
divorce me and take all the children and
all the resources anyways. There's no
legal protections for any of this. So in
effect there's a there's a there's a
scenario here where
to produce value at this particular
point is not only low status low low uh
uh intelligence but it's basically
something at this point that's just
considered to be fundamentally
disadvantageous. We have to change the
social moors around that. Right? The
notion of shame wants to be associated
with someone who takes rather than with
someone who makes. But right now all the
shame is being heaped on the makers and
not at all on the takers. The takers are
being celebrated and the makers are
basically being shamed out of existence.
And of course the inevitable result of
that is that the commons dries up and
then civilization comes to an end cuz
civilization is a commons. It's the
commons that we call cities and it's the
commons we call civility. But when
civility itself gets weaponized,
then you know basically at that point
all bets are off. It's going to go from
like civility would have been a way to
have prevented a hot war like people
actually shooting one another. But when
civility is no longer available, when
civility itself is being weaponized,
then the inevitable consequence is is
that sometime shortly after that the
level of violence starts crime climbing,
right? Because if you if every single
time people are trying to have an
intellectual argument to talk about
ideas and other people will basically
pull it into an emotional sphere, make
it an emotional argument and you're
therefore wrong for thinking rationally.
The rationalism itself is treated as the
enemy partially because it's associated
with causation. As we know noticed
earlier, causation can't solve this
problem. But you won't solve the problem
of maker better choices by doing it from
an emotional basis. you'll you'll make
better choices by having emotional
intelligence, which means that there's
some rationalness to that as well. You
want to combine rational with emotional
feeling awareness. You want to have
both. You don't want to have just one or
the other. But every single time people
basically stomp a rational conversation
with irrational emotional abuse and
manipulation,
then at some point another reality is
going to set in. And people will
basically be forced in a position where
they have to stomp emotional immaturity
with physical process. Even if they
don't do it personally, nature will do
it. Right? At some point or another,
nature isn't going to care how entitled
you think you are. It's going to
basically not care that you can't feed
yourself because you don't have any
money because effectively you made
yourself into a position where it's
impossible to earn it because you've
made it so that the entire economy blew
up, right? Like I I think at some point
or another we have to basically start to
to to to move it out of a conversation
as who has what and who's deserving and
so on so forth and start to think about
it at a deeper level of the relationship
between choice, change, and causation of
the sort of dynamics that inform how do
we make better choices rather than
continually trying to use causal
processes to compel other people to give
you stuff because you believe that you
deserved it.
Right? that you're the victim, so
therefore you deserve X, Y, and Z,
restitution, and so on so forth. You're
basically trying to use legal tools and
conversational manipulation and all the
rest of that sort of stuff to become a
better taker. And all you're really
doing is depleting the commons more and
more. And you then do it with
technology. You then do it with
artificial intelligence. And you then
become justified. Well, my AI told me
that I was right and that I was a victim
and that I was deserving of X, Y, and Z.
Nature doesn't care.
other human beings might care but you
have to basically be in relationship
with them where that relationship's
compassionate enough so the care becomes
possible but if the if the notion of
compassion itself has been weaponized to
such an extent then then then even care
itself doesn't become something that's
available as part of the conversation so
at this point I would say you know if if
if we're if we're looking to try to move
into the space of solutions first of all
we need to learn how to talk to one
another we need to learn how to be civil
we need to learn how to effective ly be
emotionally intelligent and rational at
the same time. Wow, what an idea. And
then on the other hand, we need to start
thinking deeper about the relationship
between value production and value
consumption and to actually socially
favor the value production and have a
way for that to occur in a way that
doesn't automatically
castrate the person that's producing the
value production. Okay, that would be a
good idea. and and that you know from
there we could start to think about
things like choice distribution and
embodiment and contextualization so that
we can actually begin to reverse these
kinds of things to actually make
something that works in the world. So I
think of this as a social problem not a
financial one.
>> Yeah. So one of the core things I'm
hearing
certainly that I would emphasize is the
importance of
receptivity
to relationship and to be able to
perceive what is vital and what is
contributing vitality to relationship.
>> Yeah. compassion, care, connection,
attunement, discernment and from that
wisdom, collective wisdom,
>> right? And you know, so one of the
things I notice is the
blocks
one might experience to entering the
kind of relational process that you're
pointing at. particularly when you
emphasize both the thinking and the
feeling or the emotion and the
rationality that the blocks can show up
quite differently depending on what you
might be approaching
with
um and what you might meet in the other.
And so that's one of the challenging
things which is why I'm emphasizing the
receptivity in relationship as something
which can
you know it's it it is
humility itself.
>> Right. Right. Right. Like so so that
that virtue of humility as a kind of
willingness to to perceive from the
other's perspective so that we can see
both ourselves and the other and the
situation more legitimately. So one of
the things that we would love to see
more of is just
>> the virtue of humility being treated as
a virtue rather than as say oh well that
person is humble so therefore he's less
desirable for relationship than the you
know 6oot Chad that's sitting next to
him
>> and for it not to be performative which
is the other point you're making and so
in with with that in mind you know one
of the things I've mentioned a few times
on the podcast before that the ethmology
of humility is to do with the roots.
>> Yeah. And being low to the earth to do
with the roots and that brings in if we
go below the earth there's a the unseen
connectivity and exchange processes
where the mycelio between mycelio and
trees which are doing a whole lot of
work to make possible
the
basis of vitality.
>> That's right. from which one is in a
sense anchoring to do a non-performative
humility. But it's also a very complex
context. And so there is a sense in
which
the humility being pointed to here is
one that is able to locate itself with
respect to what matters in a way where
what matters cannot just be reduced to
some notion or concept of compassion but
also involves some of the dynamics of
the the broader maybe deeper flows. It's
got to touch the real. Like the the the
metaphor of the roots is delightful,
right? Because because if you're in
touch with the ground,
like it used to be a long time ago,
we're talking like ancient ancient
times, that the notion of the snake or
in this particular case, the dragon was
considered a symbol of wisdom because
its entire body was touching the ground.
It knew the truth in a sense of ground
truth like that which is inarguable not
an element of belief but genuinely in
contact with the surface of the world
the the reality of the world. And when
you're looking at the the deep
unconscious communications in a sense
humility is recognizing that we are as
much an unconscious as we are a
conscious. We are as much embodied as we
are a brain. And that unless we
integrate and accept and actually be in
right relationship to our own genuine
nature,
we can't be in relationship with one
another. Right? Like the the tree has to
be the tree in order for its roots to
mesh with other trees. We have to be
human in order to mesh with other human
beings. And that means a certain degree
of humility for that relationship to
thrive on the basis of this unconscious
network of ideas and experiences. Like
the mere fact that we eat the same foods
roughly speaking, every mammal and
creature on earth is going to integrate
carbon-based foods. Okay? One form or
another. And that gives us a metabolism
that helps us to have compassion and
understand one another because we all
live the same way. And so in this sense
to try to look for compassion from a
machine which doesn't even have a common
digestive system with us is a complete
farce.
So we need to re relearn how to be human
beings so we can be human together,
renaturalize ourselves and ultimately
rew ourselves so that we can be in right
balance with nature so that endurance
does does happen. Sustainability,
evolution and consciousness can all
co-occur. The humility is the
consciousness piece.
>> Yeah. So,
one piece I want to add in here
is on the one hand to recognize the way
that you've articulated embodiment
as
actually being in person, being in a
rich enough embodied context so that
such things like attunement are more
possible. These there's a sense in which
that's obviously true.
My my relating to it is to also wants to
emphasize the orientation.
So if we say that virtualization is on
the other end of embodiment then there's
a sense in which I might meet you as we
are here where there is a context of the
virtual but we can co-orient and
coordinate in relation with the virtual
and then have a sense of where we may
ground ourselves and are grounded with
respect to the embodied. And when I
think about everything from philosophy
as well as to the complexity of the
systems of power and transaction which
are so incredibly powerful at ins
snaring and entangling us of course a
lot of that is experienced in a virtual
way. And so the prospect of rewing and
the prospect of attaining in some sense
the ideal of the direction of course
does feel very far away and it could be
as simple in one one sense if one is so
fortunate as to step outside and be able
to touch grass and all of that. you
know, we can do both sides of it, but
there's also still this necessity, it
seems, of being able to meet and
interact in the context of where we are.
Uh, which in its own way might be
tremendously virtualized.
And, you know, not to decry that in a
sense as a failure or a task not to be
taken on, but what humility can we bring
to that and in what way can we reorient
from that basis? And here is where you
know notions of a certain kind of
sacrifice
is something that's worth opening up.
There's this sense you know so for
instance one of the ways you've
communicated what I'm roughly speaking
pointing towards here is you know
there's a a sense of the the beauty and
the service of planting a tree for which
you may not get to sit in the shade.
Right.
>> So there's that element, but there's
also, I think, something to affirm about
the actual vitality
associated with that planting of the
tree and nurturing it from sapling form.
>> The ground wants to be a ground that can
receive this seed.
>> So in other words, I can't just plant a
tree in the middle of a parking lot. The
other thing that that that becomes
important is that as the person planting
the tree, I'm wanting to to to look
ahead. Is this a community
that will value the tree for being a
tree? Or is this a community that might
basically say, "Oh, as soon as that
thing's tall enough to make lumber, I'm
cutting it so that I can basically So,
so for me, if I'm planting the tree,
knowing that all I'm really doing is
making the second son of that guy down
the road a little richer because he
basically got some lumber out of my
effort. And I'm basically going to say,
"This ain't the ground. I want to go
elsewhere that is also fertile ground
and has a community that would value it.
Or if this is the only ground in which
this seed can take, I don't want the
seed to die. I'm going to basically, you
know, try to preserve that tree, but I'm
also going to try to set up something
maybe culturally,
legally. I have doubts that that'll
work. But for example, if I basically
somehow managed to convince the
community that actually this is a tree
that you want to let live, then I'm
going to feel good about making the
sacrifice.
But this is where the the naivee comes
in. It used to be the case that the
notion of turn the other cheek and
sacrifice
was was treated as a virtue. Notice
notice how closely aligned the ver the
notion of virtual
and virtue is.
Virtual
is empty.
>> I've done some writing on this.
>> Yeah. Great. Well, then I'm I'd love to
see it. Um whereas virtue is indwelling.
It's like virtual is is is abstracted
from the outside
but virtue is deep in dwelling on the
inside. And so in this particular sense
I want to have both the virtue of
being a maker, being a creator, being
somebody that produces value beyond my
own needs, beyond my own self to be
super generative.
And I want to be mindful that the
generativity is going where it's going
to actually do some good.
So in effect, I need the wisdom in
addition to the willingness.
And in effect, the the combination it's
it's it's always been the case like rich
people will basically say to all the
factory workers, do the sacrifice. And
then they will try to ensure that the
people are going through a schooling
system that effectively is based on the
Prussian model of making you obedient
slaves and therefore turn you into
really good workers that don't think
about where does all the value where
does all the benefit go? Well, it
obviously goes to the rich person who
basically uh flers it on uh you know
some rich yacht that basically is going
to sink because they they didn't pay
attention to the to the local climate or
something, right? And so there's a
there's a point here where
>> it can't just be sacrificial
willingness. It has to be mindfulness
to really understand what is going to be
generative not just today but tomorrow.
What is going to in a sense be a
contribution of the commons that isn't
just going to be stolen by somebody
who's essentially increasing their
prestige. And that's how relationships
break with me. Like like if I if I
notice that your intentions no matter
what you say but your actual actions are
just to increase your own
aggrandisement your own status and
doesn't actually contribute anything to
the world then I'm basically going to
say well you're talking about not to you
personally Tim but I basically have been
in relationships you know the story
already where
people extracted value from the commons.
they extracted I had given value to the
commons and then I watched them steal it
and it would be like you know what first
I'm going to block you from stealing it
but then I'm also going to think
carefully about whether or not I give to
that commons
so in effect I've gotten very reluctant
to basically be too contributive if it's
just going to go to waste anyways
>> yeah there was a way I wrote poetically
once about the
the the fate of that mode of sacrifice
in terms of being fullon and abandoned.
>> Uhhuh.
>> So,
so
>> there's devotion but devotion wants to
be to that which is worthy to be devoted
to. And humility is in a sense a
willingness to say I might not
necessarily be the virtuous most virtue
produced thing in the world but I'm
willing to work on becoming virtuous.
I'm willing to become a fit container
for the work that I do. And if I'm going
to give to somebody, I would want them
to be a fit container as well. I'd want
them to have some humility as well. And
and and and under those circumstances,
now we're in a in a situation where the
commons, the community becomes something
which is generative. It's growing. It's
building. But I have to work at the
social level first. We all need to work
on the virtue side of things. And the
and the use of shaming is roughly the
rough it's roughly the same thing as the
use of guns. You can't shame people who
shame people because shaming people is
wrong,
right? You kill people who kill people
because you know that killing people is
wrong. Okay, that whole thing is kind of
messed up. So and and it's it's it's
it's basically the case that right now
there is so much unconsciousness about
social process around human process
around what virtue is and and we've got
it all backwards so that ends up
happening is that we're cutting our own
feet off and this is this is a place
where we need to become super aware so
that our super generativity can actually
work.
>> Yeah. There's um it reminds me of a line
of logic that Gerard has when he
describes
violence and
the way that violence, the reason why
people are animated to respond violently
in kind is because of the abhorance of
violence. So, it's interesting how we
can be caught in these
self-destructive, self- annihilating
patterns and it can seem so
obvious a mistake to make and you know
with respect to the mediation of
violence of course we are very much
still in process.
So, so there's a couple things here,
Forest. I want to ask you something um
which I I know you well sometimes you
surprise me by all of a sudden giving a
10-second answer, but usually it's a
significantly longer answer. And so, I
do want to ask you one of those
questions which can hopefully give, you
know, tie a few things together with
respect to the initial framing of our
conversation. Before I do that, just as
a personal reflection of one other way
of seeing that seems to be in
connection with what you're saying, I
know that one of the things you will
articulate
is uh sort of orientation towards life
lived well and fully. Mhm.
>> And one of the ways that I've been
thinking about that in relation to other
notions for some time, you have notions
of libido and motido
and you know those have lots of
connotations but there's a sense in
which there is a certain value in the
orientation toward death in terms of
giving everything giving fully and then
but you know
>> to Yeah. and and but to have them both
in relation you want wants to something
that's actually in service to that of
virtue and so the will aspect of there
being connoted and so you know one of
the ways I sometimes give an example of
that is just in the context of playing
football you know and and how different
players can show up on the team in that
context and you know because you can
always give everything right and then
some players have got more quality but
you obviously want to have the the
balance anyway
given what we've discussed beginning
from a conversation about money and then
power understood a lot in terms of
causation. I want to ask
why the answer is sort of contained in
what you've already said but I want to
give the opportunity to bring it out
more explicitly.
Why are dominant elements in the
collective
so drawn towards
artificial intelligence turning so much
of the world's energy possibility into
artificial intelligence
that in a sense money and power more
than most other things maybe buying up
the land right I'm buying up the land
but apart from that being put in towards
artificial intelligence
So why first of all is that happening?
Maybe seems obvious but why is that
happening? And what else could it be put
towards? What ought it be put towards?
Okay.
So I mean the Gibb first answer that is
usually given in regards to why
artificial intelligence has so much
financial backing like there's so much
investment into that. Most venture
capitalists and people who are companies
for example that were very successful
like Microsoft or the others they they
they accumulated large amounts of money.
They had war chests that they could use
to invest in in all sorts of things. And
obviously they're going to want to
invest it in a way that would provide
more money in the future. So it's
basically like we've collected the
capacity to make all these choices, but
we don't know what to choose today. We
do know that we want to choose things
that's going to increase our ability to
choose tomorrow. That's how that that's
a summary of whatever capital I have
today, whatever savings I have today, I
want to invest it so that I at least
preserve the value that I have or if
anything I increase the share of the
choices that I can make in the world
relative to everybody else. So again,
you notice I'm using the same sort of
simplifications I was using earlier.
The thing about artificial intelligence
is that it's not just a machine that can
automate particular things. It's a it's
a it's an ability to
outsource choices like basic choices. So
So say I'm a a I I I was a manufacturer.
I I basically had a manufacturing
company for a while. I was a CEO. So
I've I've been through this. I've seen
it from the inside. the the main the
main thing that is the case is that when
I hire somebody,
I'm aware of the fact that I can't make
all the choices that need to be made
like every picking up this thing and
attaching it to that thing and putting
it in a box and putting a label on it.
Those are choices to move and to to do
the thing versus to do something else.
And the sheer number of things that need
to be chosen in a given scenario is
huge, way beyond the capacity of any one
person to do in the 24-hour time period.
So when I hire somebody, I'm I'm
basically giving them money,
which is a capacity for them to make
choices in their lives
with the agreement, right? That's the
employment contract that they will
choose in a way that's alignment with
what I want. So in other words, I can
make a general choice and then they can
make all the specific choices.
And in return for this, I'm enabling
them to make choices in other places to
purchase goods or services that they
themselves wouldn't have been able to
choose except for virtue of the fact
that some other producer
carved up the vegetables and another
person chose to drive them from point A
to point B so that they could buy them
at the supermarket. Right? So in effect
there's a there's a notion here that
employment is a phenomenology of choice.
Fundamentally,
if I'm the employee, I'm choosing to
align my choices with this organization
for 8 hours a day
so that in the subsequent 4 hours of
that same day, I might be able to go to
a bar because that's what I choose to
do. Right? And there's a there's a
there's a scenario here where
we're we're really talking about choices
as basically the exchange that's going
on in any employment process. So so I
wanted to do that simplification.
Now we have artificial intelligence.
Artificial intelligence becomes a way of
essentially making the same bargain but
at a much better rate.
Like
this computer isn't just going to do it
for 8 hours. It's going to do it for 24
hours. And the cost of electricity is
way less than the the cost of
employing that person, right? Like like
to employ that person, I have to pay
workers comp. I have to pay medical
insurance. I've got to pay employment
taxes. I've got to file all this
paperwork with the state. I've got to
basically I have to have an entire team
of people, usually called human
resources, which is itself an
abomination. But there's a there's a
phenomenology here where I can
effectively get the same sort of
contract. I can essentially say I'm
going to invest a certain amount of
energy, a certain amount of choice
making capacity into this device and in
return it'll basically make a bunch of
choices on my behalf. Well, they're not
actually choices. It's just a causal
output of an algorithm. But from the
point of view of what I'm looking about
again, most people are going to say that
choice and causation. Well, we have the
quote unquote illusion of free will.
Really technical aside, free will is an
illusion, but choice is real. Now, it's
just one of those things that this is a
is a language thing that a philosopher
would care about, but but most ordinary
people wouldn't. But anyways, the the
point here is is that the underlying
phenomenology of a corporation is a kind
of system. It's a kind of machine. So
the fine distinction between true choice
versus the causal simulation of choice
may as well not matter in this scenario.
So in this particular case the fin the
motivation for why to invest in machines
that automates things is because they
increase the degree to which you can
have earnings. So, if I manage to fire
all my staff and replace them with
computers, that basically means that the
cost of production has gone down by a
factor of nine or 10 or so, like I'm I'm
basically spending onetenth of what I
otherwise would have and I'm getting
three times as much productivity at
least, probably four, right? So, and
then and then you think about the
network effects. If I'm an AI company
that's made these capacities, made these
machinery, then selling the machinery to
all of these businesses, all of these
factories or or corporations or whatever
it is that's being replaced by AI, that
becomes a 10x, 100x,000x,
maybe even 10,000x return on investment,
right? And so from a venture capital
point of view, you know, venture capital
is a very asymmetric game. As a venture
capitalist, I might invest in
15 things
and 14 of them may be total losses, but
if that 151 is a 100x yield on
investment, it pays for those 14 and I
get more. Now, I'm not personally a
venture capitalist. I just happen to
know about venture capitalism a little
bit, right? Again, because I was in the
industry for a while and I' I've left
the scene, basically. But the the point
is is that a venture capitalist that can
basically get more than 100x return on
investment, that is like that's the
golden ticket. They're done. They've
won. Okay. But this AI thing, this is a
thing where they're basically saying,
"Wow, I could probably get a,000x return
on investment or maybe 10,000 return on
investment. This is the best game
anybody has ever played."
So you have this sort of perfect storm
of technology coming in and people with
huge war chests of money to invest in
something and investing it in almost
anything else doesn't even seem to make
sense in comparison. Like you're going
to put it in Bitcoin, well that's kind
of risky. Well, you're going to put it
in government bonds. Well, that's also
kind of risky. Maybe it depends. You
know, a lot of stuff can happen. But if
I make the capacity to make the capacity
to make lots of money, well, that's like
that exponential thing exponent again,
right? That that's like first time ever.
Of course, they're going to they're
going to they're going to do all they
can. It's like this is a uh it's it's
like if they're gambling, it's like
double or nothing at the very end of the
night. So there's a there's a scenario
here where just from a financial
perspective, there is huge
return on investment ideas, hype going
on and anything having to do with
long-term existential risk never even
entered their minds. So or if it did, it
became yet another thing. Wow, this
thing is so powerful. It's so dangerous.
Therefore, we should regulate it. So
therefore, we are the only ones that can
even play this game.
So as far as they're concerned, the
existential risking is just a sales
pitch that allows them to multiply the
degree of worthiness of investing in
this like like if you were the the the
first person to invest in nuclear
technology with a hope of actually being
able to build weapons and then those
weapons essentially became the most
valuable thing you could purchase if you
were a government, right? Then now all
of a sudden you're like you're making
bank. So, so, so this is the basic
reason why artificial intelligence is
basically being treated with such hype
right now. Um, but the other the other
piece and this is I think kind of the
deeper reason is is that again there's a
profound confusion between causal
process and choice process. And so if
people look at governments and and and
and things like that and they say,
"Well, humanity has it up pretty
bad. You know, like we're noticing all
these particular problems. Maybe we're
just bad at making choices. So, we're
going to abdicate that. We're going to
give all of our choices to machines
because machines are probably more
trustworthy than your politicians that
are that are in the White House. Okay?
Like, like between trusting an automated
system versus trusting a bureaucrat who
is for sure on the graft,
you're going to trust the machine. At
least it follows rules, right? Like the
guy, he ain't going to follow rules.
He's just going to basically do whatever
the he wants that day. I'm sorry.
Just going to cut that one word out.
Anyways, um the point here is is that
there's a
there's a there's a whole phenomenology
associated with us discounting our own
capacity to make choices collectively in
a way that actually works. And so in
effect, the common people are basically
saying, well, at least it's better than
what's currently going on. Maybe that'll
turn out all right in the long run. Now,
of course, that turns out to be not true
because it just increases the level of
inequality even more because the average
person isn't going to understand how to
build an LLM from scratch. They're not
going to have the resources to do that.
The the whole Trojan horse kind of thing
has gotten way worse. The Manurion
candidate scenario has gotten way worse.
At this particular point, you can't
trust half of the stuff you see on the
media anyways now because it's already
propaganda most of the time. So, so in
effect there's a there's a scenario here
where the level of hostility of the
world has gone up with respect to the
human being and most human beings are so
despondent about their own nature
knowing very little about themselves
that they basically think that this is
an improvement.
So those are the two factors that I'm
aware of and there's probably another
one but let's just say that anything
after this is probably a rounding error.
Yeah, in a in a sense that second reason
is a
loss of
trust in
ourselves.
>> Yeah. Cuz we don't know who we are. And
this is this is the thing. It's like at
this point most people like if if if I
walk into a given room for example 10 15
years ago and I basically try to
determine whether they were
neurologically aware like did they
understand
that different neurological processes
like autism could result in different
behavioral things. Yeah they might
barely understand that or different
chemistry processes different
biochemistry could result in different
things or trauma can result in different
things. Like unless you understand the
phenomenology of how we learn,
how do we how how does anybody expect to
actually have compassion for one
another, let alone themselves, right?
Like like there's a there's a sense here
in which honestly I think the answer the
thing that we're we're trying to I I I
as an individual can't be the holder of
an answer. All I can really do is to say
here's a direction that if we move in
this direction, we collectively become
more capable of creating the answer
either within ourselves or within the
world. So we have to in effect become
the answer. We can't know the answer. We
have to in a sense embody it. We have to
contextualize ourselves in a in a way
that is
a kind of distributed organism that has
a collective awareness with enough
wisdom to actually respond to the world
in a way that makes sense. And you need
more contact between human beings, one
another, and human beings and nature
itself for that to even become possible.
So that's the direction we need to go
in.
So people want lots of choices. Maybe
people want asymmetric choices, but they
don't know what to choose.
And somehow those two dynamics are
inflating the bubble that's continuing
to push in the direction of maximize
causation, maximize power without
enabling, developing, cultivating
wisdom. They know that they want, they
just don't know what.
And they they haven't become aware of
themselves enough to know the difference
between want, need, and desire. Because
even then, it's like there's a there's a
conflation. We think in terms of wants,
but really it's about desire,
not even need like that that that's a
whole other conversation. At which point
I would suggest refer to the delicate
fire notes because that that that
podcast has that description filled out.
>> Great. Okay. Well, I'll I'll put a link
to that. Yeah, I do I have found it
extremely worthwhile to think in terms
of want, need, and desire. I was reading
in um some of Marx's writings that
you know his analysis does seem to be
reduced to
want but it's very common that all those
three are collapsed into that and I of
course we do have intuitive senses of
you know need being distinct from want
and and all and all the rest of it but I
agree with you it is very much
worthwhile. All right. Well, it feels
like that's an appropriate place to
bring that to a close there and just
thank you, Forest. Most welcome. Thank
you for this uh delightful conversation
where uh your willingness to listen in
humility to me pontificate. I appreciate
that.